Good morning, everybody.
I'm Glenn Bullich on the QuickTime team.
Thank you for getting
up and getting in here.
There's definitely a worm
for these early birds.
I'd like to remind you also
tomorrow morning at 9 o'clock,
724, QuickTime in the professional media
workflow is a tremendous session.
I've been working on it quite a bit.
Today's session is,
I designed it so that developers
and engineers could get a sense
of what's going on in Hollywood,
in the motion picture industry,
in post-production and get a sense of
sort of the bloom that's happening.
Clearly, personal computers have had
significant impact in print and
then on air graphics and television,
but over the last six, seven,
eight years, they've gone into motion
picture creation quite a bit.
So, thank you.
We're really lucky to
have these two speakers.
Anton is at Technicolor and we decided
whether it was Video Guy or the
Director of Technical Services there.
And Scott Simmons runs a company
down in Los Angeles as well
that's doing some incredible work.
So,
we'll hold questions to the end and we'll
start immediately so we can get through
this material and I hope you enjoy it.
Anton?
Thank you.
My name is Anton Linecker.
I'm the Technical Operations Supervisor
at Technical or
Creative Services in Hollywood.
What we're going to talk about
today is how Final Cut Pro and
QuickTime are revolutionizing
the HD workflow in Hollywood.
Pretty much with this seminar,
we'll go over how high definition works,
what the workflow is for it,
how to work with a 2398 project.
Basically,
in the motion picture industry,
we're talking about high definition
as 24p or some people call it 2398.
So that's what we're going to be dealing
with with this particular seminar.
We're going to be talking about how to
offline cut your show and then go into
an online in Final Cut Pro and how to
think differently about high definition.
What you're not going to learn in
this session is how to code anything.
I'm a video guy.
I'm sorry.
So basically, a little bit about myself.
I give seminars at
Technicolor to directors,
producers, cinematographers, editors,
talking about how to shoot and
edit high-definition footage for
eventual film-out purposes or
for finishing in high-definition.
And in the process of
doing these seminars,
inevitably,
I talk about the traditional HD workflow.
And with the traditional HD workflow,
People have been doing HD for a while,
and they've been limited to a
certain extent by the technologies
that have been available.
High-definition equipment
is very expensive.
People used to use AVIDs
almost exclusively,
and they set up their whole
workflow based on the film model.
So that means having standard-definition
down-conversion tapes where you
have your high-definition media.
Because you don't have a D5 deck
or an HD deck in your edit suite,
you will have a facility
down-converted for you to a
standard-definition NTSC cassette.
And so in that process,
you take 2398 media,
and you have to somehow
get it to 2997 NTSC.
And to do that,
you actually introduce something.
You have something called 3-2,
which is where you take
the fields of the video,
and you repeat them in a 3-2 pattern
so that you add the six frames that
are missing between that 24 and 30.
I'm going to use the 24
and 30 interchangeably here
with the 2399 and 2997.
They're in essence the same thing.
So you have this 3-2 pull-down
that's added to your tapes for
the standard-definition workflow.
And then they basically tape.
You take those standard-definition
tapes and either work in 2997 or remove
the 3-2 and work in a 2398 workflow.
And that's a couple of steps
in a workflow right there.
You have EDLs, edit decision lists.
We'll talk a little bit
more about that shortly.
But you have to somehow get the
information from your offline cut,
what you've basically been
editing for four or five months,
until your feature is finished,
to the online room.
The online room is where
you do your mastering,
where you take that standard-definition
project and make it into a
high-definition finished master
that you can air or broadcast,
or you can take out to film,
whatever your project entails.
And then another thing about
standard-definition down conversions is
that you have a change in aspect ratio.
You have your high-definition
tapes are -- they're widescreen.
They're 16 by 9.
Yet when you do a down conversion
to a standard-definition tape,
you're working in 4 by 3,
normal television size.
And you can either work
it a couple of ways.
You can do a squeezed standard-definition
tape where you have -- if you
look at it on a normal monitor,
people are tall and skinny,
and then they get unsqueezed
to do a widescreen.
Or you have a center extraction
where you only take the center
information and cut off the sides.
Or you can do a letterbox extraction.
You can do a letterbox extraction where
you shrink everything down and you have
the black on the top and the bottom.
These particular methods
have ramifications for when
you go to your mastering,
which we'll talk about shortly.
So, one of the things in talking and
giving these seminars and giving,
you know, explaining the traditional
workflow for the 240th time,
something occurred to me,
is that traditional HD workflow is hard.
It's unnecessarily so.
The entire idea that you have,
that you work at a different time code
rate than what your master tapes are,
that you have to change
this aspect ratio,
all these particular parts of the
workflow make it unnecessarily hard.
And so, I end up having people asking me,
why do we have to work with these 2997
cassettes when our masters are 2398?
Why are we dealing with 4x3 when
it's actually 16x9 that we shot?
And so, Thank you.
You then have the EDLs,
the Edit Decision List,
that's basically 30-year-old technology.
Ironically,
it's still something we use today,
and a lot of facilities depend on it,
because it has been that kind
of Rosetta Stone that we use to
talk between editing products.
But an EDL is just a text file.
It's a text file that has timecode
values for your source tapes,
timecode values for your master tape,
and little descriptions,
but it's all text.
Oh, actually, I can go.
They're pretty limiting
because they're text files.
Depending on the format that you have,
you either have two levels of
video and four levels of audio.
That's an example.
Some have two levels of video,
two levels of audio.
The titles and effects, transitions,
they're only partially supported.
You get a little note saying that you
have a dissolve there of a certain type,
but you don't know if you
have an iris dissolve,
if you have a fade up
or something like that.
That's not actually in there.
And in motion effects,
where you take your video,
you blow it up slightly
or you move it around,
that's not supported at all.
So,
if you're working on modern equipment,
modern edit systems,
you have a lot more control.
You take a Final Cut Pro project,
for example, you have 99 video tracks.
You have 99 audio tracks.
If you take a Final Cut Pro project from
one system and take it into another,
all of the special effects,
the transitions, the titles,
speed changes,
all of those things come across.
And so, if you're working in a
Final Cut Pro environment
and you want to make an EDL,
you actually have to hold yourself back.
You have to hold yourself back.
And edit in a way so that
the EDL will work nicely,
that it will play nice with
whatever system you end up
going to for your online.
So, basically,
you can do a lot of things with this.
We were there,
I kind of came to this little
conclusion that there should be a
better way to do high definition.
And so,
with the help of the QuickTime team,
the Final Cut Pro team,
and hardware support
from AJA and Pinnacle,
we've come up with a different
way to do high definition.
And I think it's actually
a better workflow.
And better for me means simple,
because I don't want it
to be a complicated thing.
So, with this particular
workflow is used now,
At Warner Brothers, and 20th Century Fox,
and where HD is really prevalent
in the independent community,
we have several independent
filmmakers that are using it,
and Showtime is going to be doing
three shows starting in about
two weeks for their next season,
using this particular system.
So before I go too much into
what the actual system is,
I'll tell you a little bit
about the basics of HD,
and why this change,
this paradigm shift is so important.
With HD, pretty much everybody knows the
reason why you want to work with HD is
that you have great visual quality.
If you have an NTSC signal,
you're working with 720x486
lines of resolution.
If you're talking DigiBeta,
it's 480 if you're DV.
With that,
you can go up to a high-definition
signal where you're 1920x1080.
So you have drastically more pixels
and lines of resolution to work with.
And the picture is so much nicer.
What you also have is that
NTSC is an interlaced format.
And so it draws a single frame
with two fields of video that's
clocked to our electrical.
So we got a 60 hertz electrical.
And so we have 60 fields that come
together to make the 30 frames of video,
or 2997.
That's kind of an old thing.
So you have these interlaced
fields that come together.
And so what ends up happening
is that you have the first field
draw half of the information.
And then the second field comes in like a
zipper and completes the picture for you.
With high-definition,
if you're talking about 24 pixels...
...and you have a true whole image
from top to bottom drawn at once.
So it's more filmic in that regard.
And so that's the whole
appeal of working in 24p HD.
That quality comes at a price.
The price is data rate.
And so depending on what
kind of format you're doing,
you're talking anywhere from 90 megabytes
a second to 160 megabytes a second.
So that's the appeal
of working in 24p HD.
But that's a lot of data to
get in and off your drives.
And so this is not the type of thing
that you can do off of a firewire.
It's not the type of thing that you
can do off of a single IDE drive.
So at our facilities,
to get a speed like this,
we use an XSERV RAID maxed out.
14 drives RAIDed together
in a RAID 50 to get the data
rate fast enough to handle HD.
And not only that,
you also have the fact that...
The data, since the data rate is so high,
you use up a lot of hard
drive space very quickly.
And so, you take a look at this
difference right here.
Here you have DV, it's rounded up,
but you have DV,
which is a compressed SD signal.
The native format as
it's recorded on tape.
Then you have SD 10-bit.
If you take a DigiBeta tape and
you do a 10-bit uncompressed,
you're working at 27 megabytes a second.
So, when you do the jump to HD,
you see uncompressed
HD actually jumps quite a bit.
You have 126 megabytes
a second for 1080p.
And then for 1080i, 2997,
you're talking 160 megabytes a second.
So,
you're chowing through hard drive space.
And so,
uncompressed HD is not really very
useful or practical for offline editing.
Because if you're a traditional feature,
motion picture, in Hollywood,
you'll shoot about 60 hours,
70 hours of footage.
And so, at HD,
uncompressed HD data rates.
You're talking somewhere on the
lines of 60 to 70 terabytes of
storage that you need for 5,
6 months while your editor and your
director is whittling down that
60 hours to an hour and a half.
And so, that's not a practical
thing to keep track of.
It's very expensive because you need
to buy XRARs or like large SCSI arrays.
So, working in uncompressed
HD is not practical at all.
So because of that,
the traditional workflow had
this down conversion mentality.
Since working in uncompressed
HD isn't practical,
and there was no other
solution available before,
down conversions was the only way to go.
But you have all the hang-ups
that come along with that
standard definition workflow.
At Technicolor, we were thinking that we
wanted to stay digital.
We didn't want to go down to a Beta SP.
We didn't want to go down to a DVCam.
We wanted to give them
QuickTime movies delivered on FireWire.
And those QuickTime movies are
direct descendants from the HD.
We'll take D5HD, HDCam,
and bring it in and transcode
it on the fly to an offline
format that the company requests.
And that offline format can be PhotoJPG,
which is very good quality
but a very low data rate,
very nice for offline editing,
particularly if you have
a lot of hours of footage.
We can go to DV and
we'll do it a 16 by 9 DV.
We'll go DV50 or--
Since about two, three months,
we can go to DVC Pro HD with the
new Final Cut Pro HD version.
And so we'll talk a little bit
more about that and show why
that's an interesting workflow.
So with the Final Cut Pro HD media,
we are giving high
quality QuickTime movies.
The time code that you see in your
Final Cut Pro system corresponds
exactly to the master tapes.
And so there's no difference between
time codes that you're dealing with.
And so when you go do your
mastering of your movie,
all the time codes line up and
it simplifies things there.
You don't have to change the lists,
go through any kind of
conversion processes.
Like in Cinema Tools right now,
we have something where you can go
from a 2997 list to a 2398 list.
You don't need to do any of that.
So the time code comes across exactly.
The data rate is low.
And so it can be as low as 1 50th,
the original data rate.
That's in particular with the photo JPEG.
And it preserves a 16 by 9 aspect ratio.
What's nice about that is that you see
everything that you have on the HD tape.
You can see if there's... There is...
A light stand in the shot on this side,
whereas if you do a 4x3 extraction,
you might have missed that.
You can time things so that they happen
properly when someone walks out of frame
that you know exactly when they leave,
whereas if you have a
4x3 center extraction,
they would seem to leave
the frame far earlier.
So, the first show that we did this with
was a Warner Brothers independent
movie called Around the Bend,
which is coming out, I believe,
in August.
And it was shot on 35mm 4-perf, negative.
We telecineated,
meaning transferring to high definition,
to HDD5.
We picked D5 because it's a 10-bit media.
Then we captured it on the fly from
the D5 and we went to half HD res.
And so the resolution that they
were working at was greater
than standard definition.
It was 960x540.
It was perfect 16x9.
The average data rate
was 2 megabytes a second.
So we went from 126 megabytes to 2.
And that two megabytes is less than DV,
by the way.
It's not quite half, but it's close.
They edited the whole
show on Final Cut 4.1,
so it is possible to use
this workflow in 4.1.
Right now, we are on 4.5 or Final Cut HD,
so that's where we -- this
was a couple months back.
And to view their footage,
they had multiple options.
When they were editing in Albuquerque,
they had a DVI projector
hooked up to their edit system.
And so when they looked at their footage,
they actually went through the DVI and
projected it onto a 20-foot screen.
And so they actually edited the movie,
and it looked like
they were in a theater,
which is very nice.
They also were able to go out
to their 23-inch cinema display,
which was quite nice, high resolution.
And the look is far better than
what people traditionally have
worked with in an offline situation.
Traditionally,
offline media looks very blocky,
very low res.
This was far better.
They could see focus.
They had very good color saturation.
So, with that particular project,
we've now finished it.
By the way,
we also gave them a CinemaTools database,
which has all the key code
information of their film,
so that we're able to
do a key code cut list.
But when we went online for
their preview screenings,
they did HD preview screenings.
I don't know if many of you
are familiar with Los Angeles.
There's a fantastic theater
at the Grove in the Fairfax
district of Los Angeles.
They had preview screenings in HD.
To do the preview screenings,
the editors gave us a
FireWire hard drive.
On that FireWire hard drive,
we had a project file,
which had each of their reels.
Media managed so that all of the
excess media was clipped off.
And so when we go into
digitize as high definition,
we're only capturing
the stuff that we need.
The timecode of that media was
exactly as it was on the HD tapes.
So Final Cut, we edited this on a
Final Cut HD system with an AJ Kona
card at 10 bit uncompressed.
So it would take in from the D5s
exactly the clips that it needed.
It then also took in
all of the transitions,
filters, color effects, speed changes,
even titles came in perfectly.
And the titles were exactly spaced
where they were or placed in
the proper space on the screen.
So,
we also did the--we also had them give
us a QuickTime movie of each reel.
And that QuickTime movie had a timecode
burn of the original D5 burned into it.
And we then did a picture in
picture while we were editing it.
So you see right here,
we have one screenshot from the
movie where you can see that we have
exactly the right spot visually.
And if anything should go wrong,
which nothing did by the way,
but if there was a discrepancy,
for example, you know,
sometimes we have productions where
they shoot and they have two tape ones
and they didn't name it differently.
And so, maybe we put in the wrong tape
one and digitized from that.
We would have seen a difference
in the top right-hand corner.
And that we would have been able to see,
okay,
the timecode that we captured was right,
but perhaps the tape was wrong.
And so, we would be able to go in
and address the problem.
So, if we switch to-- number two,
I'll show a little example of
having the picture in picture.
And we can have it playing so you can see
each and every edit comes in properly.
This is some San Francisco footage
that the QuickTime people gave me.
And so this is a really nice
way to just go through and you
know that your edit is proper.
You can also go through
And just step through each shot
and just go to the edit points.
And you can go back and check.
So for going through and making sure
that each and every edit is correct,
it's a very nice way to work.
Previously, what you would have is you
would have a chase cassette.
And you would have a beta SP,
very low res,
that you would run in parallel
and watch on two screens to
see if everything matched up.
This was nice because it let us go in
and we could see on the edit machine
right away if we had any problems.
I'll just advance a little bit here.
OK, we can go back to slides.
So, in terms of a workflow,
it was very streamlined.
They had to hardly ever make tapes.
When they needed to make a tape,
it was quite easy.
They dumped, in this case,
they dumped their media to,
they bought no extra hardware,
by the way.
They just used a Dual G5
and a cinema display.
They had no extra hardware.
They did have an XR braid,
but they had no video cards, no nothing.
So, in order to make tapes,
what they did was they took
the photo JPEG sequence,
dumped it into a DV sequence.
It resized automatically
as a letterbox image.
They did a render.
It was less than,
actually more than real-time render.
And with Final Cut 4,
when you play out a 2398 sequence,
it adds in the 3-2 again as necessary
to go out to tape when you're DV.
So, they were able to make.
So, they were able to make cassettes
for their sound editors,
for their negative cutters,
all that quite easily.
So.
So, in terms of this workflow,
how could we make it better?
Well, one thing that's really nice
and makes it better is with the
introduction of Final Cut Pro HD,
we have access now to DVC Pro HD.
And DVC Pro HD is really revolutionary
in terms of how we work with HD.
It's the same impact as
DV had four or five years ago,
six years ago.
Because before DV was introduced,
editing video was really hard.
And you would always have
kind of so-so quality.
You would have a little capture card
with RCA inputs and you'd capture it in,
you'd get your little QuickTime movie,
and it would be really hard to edit.
And DVC Pro HD was low-res and all that.
Then DV came along, you had FireWire,
you were able to plug
that into your computer,
you didn't need a video card,
anything like that.
And you could edit in either iMovie,
Final Cut Pro, Final Cut Express.
And that changed a lot of things.
You had now something that looked
pretty much like Beta SP quality,
which had been a
professional video product.
And you had easy accessibility to it.
You could have it on your
internal IDE drives and all that.
So, with DVC Pro HD,
you had a lot of things
that you could do.
You could have it on your
internal IDE drives and all that.
With DVC Pro HD, you had a lot of things
that you could do.
You could have it on your
internal IDE drives and all that.
With DVC Pro HD, you have the same thing.
DVC Pro HD allows you to edit in true HD.
This is not half-resolution HD,
it's true HD.
But you don't have to get hit with
the uncompressed HD data rate.
So basically, with 24p DVC Pro HD,
it runs at 5.8 megabytes a second.
As compared to the uncompressed,
10-bit uncompressed, which runs at 126.
So you see a massive data
rate difference between the
uncompressed and the DVC Pro HD.
The reason for that is the DVC Pro HD is
the same format as the camera,
the DVC Pro HD camera writes to tape.
And the heads on the DVC Pro HD camera
can't write 126 megabytes a second.
So they had to find a way to
kind of shoehorn it down to a
more manageable... data rate.
So in their normal state,
you have this DV100,
where it's 100 megabits.
That's with the small B, not the big B.
Megabits.
And of that,
we then only take 24 frames of it.
It's set for 60.
We take 24.
So the other 36 frames get lopped off,
so we save that data rate.
So,
If you take a look at the chart
of the differences between HD,
you take a look at the DVC Pro HD at 24p,
it is only slightly more than DV is.
Now,
for an offline format to traditionalists,
having an offline format that's
5.8 megabytes is still high.
Okay, that's granted because you
are going to use still quite
a bit of hard drive space.
But the advantages are so great.
You're now editing in complete HD res.
This is not some fake HD.
It's real HD.
You have real-time effects.
You have HD playback through a
cinema display or DVI projector.
Okay,
which if you go back to the computer too.
I got a little bit of black before this,
but... So what I was showing
before was actually the DVC Pro HD.
Oops.
And so with this format,
I'm actually playing
off of a FireWire drive.
A little-a-see bus-powered drive.
So, it really changes the rules for HD.
You know, I didn't pull out an XRV RAID.
It's just a tiny little firewire drive.
And we can go back to the slides again.
And if you have that ability,
you can go out with a DVI projector,
project it on a 20-foot screen, edit it,
perfect HD.
You can lay back to the
new Panasonic 1200 deck.
It has FireWire in,
and so you don't need any special cards,
video cards or anything.
You literally plug a
FireWire 400 into it,
and you can lay back your tape with the
same efficiency as you do DV currently.
You can use Compressor
to make standard DVDs,
which is very nice.
They're pristine in quality.
And the minimum system
requirement is one,
PowerBook or iBook.
That has a gigahertz
processor and a gig of RAM.
That's it.
I was editing HD flying back
from NAB at 10,000 feet on
Southwest on battery power.
That's really cool.
And so that's the future
of HD editing now.
So that's it for me.
- Can everybody hear me?
I guess so.
Good morning.
I'm Scott Simmons.
I'm the visual effects supervisor
for Live Wire Productions.
We do feature films and
large format films as well.
I'm just gonna poll the
audience real quick.
Who has heard of the term
digital intermediate?
Okay, there's a few of you.
Okay.
This is Roar: Lines of the Kalahari,
which is an IMAX feature
that we worked on last year.
It's been released this year
and it's doing very well.
I'll give you a little
bit of a background.
It's a giant screen film produced
by National Geographic with
acclaimed director Tim Liversedge.
Tim Liversedge is a very well-known
wildlife documentary filmmaker.
It was shot on location in Botswana.
That's where the Kalahari is,
or part of it.
Nine months of post-production.
That's not all.
The DI process, that's also music and
the final part of it.
And digital work,
the DI work was done on desktop systems.
These weren't put through very expensive,
proprietary black boxes.
So what is a digital intermediate?
And as a producer asked me,
why isn't it called digital advanced?
Well, it's an intermediate step.
It's a middle step before
you go to a release print.
So that means that every frame of the
picture has been touched by the computer.
That means things that were used
to be done optically or in the lab,
such as dissolves or
color timing and whatnot,
are all being done on the computer now.
Basically, what you end up with is
a new color negative,
and that gets output to an answer print.
Music gets added, obviously.
Um, previous IMAX pictures,
everybody's heard of IMAX movies,
I'm sure, uh, were conversions.
They weren't done, you know,
from frame one to the end credits
as a digital intermediate.
They're conversions of other pictures
that are finished ahead of time.
So this is pretty cool because
this is the first time that,
you know,
something this large has been put
through this kind of pipeline.
So let's talk about the
workflow a little bit.
All the film was scanned by Imagica.
Imagica was a large format
film service bureau.
Each frame was 4096 by 312 resolution.
We just call it 4K.
Each frame is a 10-bit Cineon log file.
For those of you that
don't know what Cineon is,
Cineon is a format that Kodak developed
that basically describes the gamut,
which is the luminance,
the color range of a piece
of motion picture negative.
[Transcript missing]
So you can imagine by the end,
I think for a portion of the show,
there was about three
terabytes worth of data.
Get that data in,
we database the scans so
we know where they are,
where they came from, you know,
what the lengths of the shots are,
which is really important.
And now here's the interesting part.
So we took those really huge files,
I mean obviously you've got a throughput
issue when each frame is 50 megabytes.
And what we did is convert
them to 8-bit log QuickTime.
So there is a logarithmic
conversion of the 10-bit Cineons
to QuickTime file format.
Obviously QuickTime file format gives
us the ability to scrub through images,
we can output proxies,
get things reviewed fairly quickly,
as opposed to, you know,
a sequence of Cineon frames which you
can't really scrub through very easily.
easily.
Then we had to look at the frames
and clean them and de-grain them.
We'll get into that a little bit better.
And then we had to examine the
shots to see if the pipeline that
we're putting them through was
actually going to benefit the shots.
And in all but four cases,
we were using QuickTime movies.
So imagine that.
We're going from a file format,
the QuickTime movie standard.
It's traditionally used in video or
even high def to something that's much,
much bigger.
Something that's projected on a 70
by 100 foot screen without artifacts.
And we're able to do that with
QuickTime because we've used
it for other feature films.
We know we're used to working with it.
We know how to get the
best results of it.
So the QuickTime movie
is basically a very good
Sub-sample of those Cineon files.
It's the best of those 10 bits,
now an 8-bit.
After examining it,
then we had to do color
grade and effects.
We'll get into that a little bit more.
We'd render to FireWire drives,
and FireWire drives would get
shuttled off by hand to CFI,
which is the film recording lab,
and it's now part of Technicolor.
And we'd get those back and
project them in dailies.
The dailies would go to an IMAX theater.
You've got to see an
IMAX movie in an IMAX theater,
see what it looks like.
And before we really
got into doing takes,
or final shots, we did some tests.
So we would do Cineon
versus QuickTime tests,
and we would compare what
we were doing to the motion
picture to the original scans.
And we knew right away we
were on the right track.
Everything was looking really great.
So, there are a lot of challenges
from doing a giant screen picture.
Obviously,
you're dealing with throughput,
you're dealing with file sizes,
you're dealing with labs, possibly,
that aren't used to
working with QuickTime.
We have to do color grading,
and color grading is more than, you know,
the tint knob on your television set.
Color grading is...
Fixing the shots,
if the shots need to be fixed,
and then creating a look for those shots
that makes it look warm or cool or has
something to do with telling the story,
time of day kind of things.
Then we added a lot of visual effects,
believe it or not,
and we'll get into the technology too.
So, challenges on this particular motion
picture is the director didn't know
it was going to be an IMAX feature.
He thought it might be an IMAX feature.
And then he started shooting 70mm,
which is the traditional format for IMAX.
And then realized, man,
these cameras are heavy,
these cameras are loud,
and I can't go within
20 feet of the lions.
with a 70 millimeter
camera because it just,
they don't like it.
They will move away.
So he ended up shooting, oh, 75,
80% of the motion
picture in 35 millimeter.
So there's a problem right there.
How do we get the 35 millimeter
to look like the 70 millimeter?
Because it's going to end up in IMAX.
He also shot with different film stocks.
Don't ask me what they were.
He doesn't know and we
couldn't figure it out.
So we had to kind of balance things
and make things come to a center.
And then we have to conform a motion
picture that was not necessarily shot
for an IMAX screen to the IMAX specs.
And then because of
the filming conditions,
a lot of what he did was he'd be shooting
in the middle of the day in the summer.
Summer in Kalahari can
get up to 150 degrees.
and he'd have his film
sitting in a cooler,
basically.
And he just grabbed
whatever he could get.
And if he was running out of films,
the PA would go get some more film,
who knows what it was,
and stick it in there.
So he's not shooting in
the best of conditions.
So there's a few cases where we
had to do some restoration work
because the film had been damaged or,
you know, the three layers, the red,
green, blue layer of the emulsion was
actually starting to separate.
Fortunately, that didn't happen too much.
So let's get into the challenges.
35 millimeter film is four perforations.
Runs up and down through the projector.
And let's say that's
a 35 millimeter still.
"Seventy.
That's a big difference.
In fact, I like that a lot.
Let's go back.
That's 16 times the
area of 35 millimeter.
That is a 50 megabyte frame
versus a 5 megabyte frame.
Four to five is usually what 2K is.
And we have to make...
Look like that.
That's a big challenge.
So how do we do something like that?
First of all,
we have to reduce the 35mm grain.
We have to identify what's
grain versus texture.
We don't want to get rid of grain and
all of a sudden the lion's coats or
the antelope's coats just disappear.
They don't want it to
look like solid browns.
You still have to have some texture.
Then you also have to
preserve edge detail,
which is the real trick.
Because if you can determine
what the edges are,
then you're preserving that
resolution of the image versus
noise or grain in this example.
So here's an image cut in very,
very close of one of the shots.
You can see the grain.
You can see the red, green, blue.
And believe it or not,
this has been color
corrected as a first step.
And what we had to do is, you know,
determine what the antlers are,
the antelope, clear up that sky because
we've got a solid sky.
I mean,
you're really going to see the grain.
And this is what we ended up with.
It's a much cleaner picture.
You can see edge detail.
You can see that there
are antelope there.
This one actually has been color
corrected and color graded.
The difference between
color correction is,
in this example,
if we got film that was sort of blue,
because he would shoot without a
color correction filter on the camera.
We have to bring it to gray.
We have to create what's
called a gray balance look.
That's important because now
we show it to the director
and the producers and say,
"Okay, this is what you shot.
This is what you saw when you
were on location." They say,
"Yes, it is." Then you color
grade it as a second step.
Color grading it is basically, "Well,
we want it to help you tell the
story." It doesn't look like Mutual
of Omaha's Wild Kingdom necessarily.
We want it to look like a feature film
so everything is sweetened a little bit.
Conforming is another issue.
This is what's called a sacred master.
A sacred master basically says,
"This is the area you've got
to play with in your film."
So if you look at this,
this is a field chart.
There's two things.
That area in the red is credit safe.
So if you imagine going to a movie,
like Next Door,
and you watch the credits,
they're going up and down or dissolving,
they're filling the frame.
You can't do that with an IMAX picture.
Because where that plus sign is,
is the viewing center of viewing.
It's not the middle,
it's the center of viewing.
So the center of viewing
in an IMAX picture is about
a third of the way up.
So that's where your eyes are looking.
And you've got all this extra
space over your head that just
makes you feel like you're there.
It just sort of surrounds you.
But where the audience is looking,
it's about a third of the way up.
So credits obviously can't
go all the way to the top.
So we're looking for that
sweet spot in the center.
Like I said before,
he's not necessarily shooting for that.
He's not necessarily framing
all of the lions or whatever the
action is for that sweet spot.
So, the center of interest in a picture,
on an iMac or large format picture is
not necessarily the center of the frame.
So what do we do?
Here's a couple of examples where on the
left we have the guinea hens and their
focus spot is actually about halfway up.
And on this shot, this helicopter shot,
obviously the center of
interest is way up at the top.
So what do we do?
We switch to demo.
So for the guineas,
we have to lower the shot in the frame,
and here's where the effects come in.
We create a digital extension.
We have to do that a lot.
Same thing for the helicopter shot.
In this case,
we're completely replacing the sky.
Everything has to be tracked.
So it becomes not just a reframing
issue or a composition issue,
it becomes a full-blown effect.
Restoration,
we have a lot of dirt and scratches.
I think you can see a
little bit up there.
I'll go ahead and play the movie.
This is a pretty good example.
Again, this is just a little part of it,
a little part of that image.
This is much, much bigger.
It's probably eight times larger than
the part that I'm showing you right now.
Like I said, you have dust and scratches.
You've got the emulsion
starting to separate.
We have to correct all of that.
This is part of the digital
intermediate process.
We're just not coloring it.
We're just not correcting it.
We're making the frames as
perfect as possible because
that's what you're going to see.
It's not happening in any other place.
It's happening in the computers and it's
happening to fix these kinds of things.
Just for fun,
when we had the wrap party for the crew,
I had a little contest to see
who could figure out how many
pieces of dirt got cleaned.
We had a little gift
bag of stuff like that.
The software actually keeps track of
that because I'm sort of masochistic.
I wanted to know how much pieces
of dirt that we cleaned up.
We cleaned up 583,000 pieces of dirt.
Some of that, let's say 100,000,
was removed procedurally.
Procedurally basically means
we had a computer analyze
the image and sort of fix it.
It's not that simple,
but that's what we did.
The rest of it had to be done by hand.
Over 400,000 pieces of dirt
had to be done by hand.
And here's the reason for it.
Why isn't there software?
Yeah, there's some software,
but it doesn't work
like the human eye does.
It'll make mistakes.
And if you make a mistake at 4K,
it's pretty obvious that your mistakes
are getting magnified pretty largely.
And there's also dust in the shot.
There's also heat waves, there's mirages,
there's distortions going on.
So you have to use your eye
to get rid of that stuff.
And that was the major
production part for us.
Can we go back to the other?
Color grading.
Okay.
Part of color grading,
I put stabilizing in there because
I'm not sure where else to put it.
He's shooting on location
in difficult situations.
Not every time is the camera locked
down and also you've got heat
distortion going on in the image.
So the image is moving around a lot.
If he's flying in a helicopter,
the camera's strapped
underneath it with bungee cords.
Sometimes the bungee cords aren't
tight enough and you get some
jitter going on in the frame.
So that has to be stabilized
because you want to want the shots
to look as perfect as possible.
Color correcting, like I said,
we're balancing from gray first
and then we're creating a look.
Okay, here's a good example.
This is a frame from Original Scan.
It's a little hard to see,
but it is dark, it is green, it is muddy,
and this is what we did to it.
So we gray balanced it,
created a color look for it,
and now you can tell it's
a lioness and her cub.
We also output to film quite a lot.
We had National Geographic come
in to see what we were doing,
and they saw the before
and afters and just gasped.
They just thought,
you can't salvage this.
There's no way you could do it.
Well, we did.
The reason we did is we started
off with the 10-bit Cineons,
full range of the film negative,
and we selected the best part
of that to work in QuickTime.
We also created color boards,
or color panels.
This is basically what you have to
do when you're working in a sequence.
You have to create a color look
that will work from shot to shot.
You can't work on a single shot and
say it looks good and the client says
yeah and you're signed off on it,
it doesn't work like that.
Every shot has to cut to one another.
In this case,
we're trying to preserve the color
of the animals more so than the sky.
The sky is pretty close,
but if you turn around and you
look at the sky behind you,
it's just going to be a different color.
What we have to nail down is
what the texture and color
of the animals looks like.
Then on top of that,
we do visual effects, shot enhancements.
You saw a little bit of that
before where you just have to
create extensions or whatnot.
And we also did some all CG-ish shots.
The first shot of the movie,
which was a little disconcerting to us,
was a complete CG shot of a star field.
Star fields are really hard to do.
I mean, you have the landscape
and the stars above it,
and we're tilting down
to the Southern Cross.
Stars are hard to do.
It's really dark.
If you're going to see
compression at all,
you would see it in something like that.
But we worked it out
so you don't see that.
We did a lot of CG maps,
and we have a cosmic zoom.
Let's go back to demo, please.
Here's another reason you have
why digital media is great.
This is an entire sequence,
but it's one shot
dissolving into the next.
So all the color grading has to
work from one shot to the next.
And here's our cosmic zoom.
Again, center of interest is
down towards the middle.
This looks amazing on a 100-foot screen.
It feels like you're
flying in for a landing.
And speaking of large,
we had to get satellite imagery
for that part of the sequence,
and we ended up with a texture
map that was 60,000 pixels wide.
That's the Okavango.
We're sort of orienting ourselves.
Look at the nice sky.
Look at that nice sky.
And that sky is all digital.
We do a matte dissolve into another
portion of the satellite image.
And we fly past the salt pans and
land right at the watering hole.
Go back to the slides, please.
Here's another special effect.
If you notice, the line is facing right.
Don't know why.
The line's supposed to be facing left.
The line wasn't cooperating.
Flop the image.
Life's going to be good.
But this is right after the
opening shot of the stars.
So this should be dawn,
but it's not dawn.
It should be dawn.
So let's combine it with
something like that.
Let's put them both together.
Let's go back to demo.
That's a cool shot.
I like that one.
So completely, again,
this is part of color grading.
It's an effect,
but it's also part of color grading.
It's also part of the
digital intermediate process.
You've got a director that says,
you know,
I want a shot that I couldn't get,
you know, and so we created it.
Can I just go back to slides, please?
So let's talk about
technology a little bit.
Some surprising things we learned
on this show in particular.
We've done IMAX feature work before.
We've even done stereo work before.
So we weren't really surprised
about that QuickTime could hold up.
I mean,
we've done a slit-scan stereo graphic,
and if you're going to see compression,
you're going to see the 8-byte grid that
you see in typical QuickTime compression.
You're going to see it
in something like that,
or you're going to see it in
something like the Starfield shot.
But we were surprised
by some simple things.
The Apple 17-inch studio displays were
the best monitors we've ever used.
It blew us away.
Don't know why.
You're better than the
cinema displays we're using.
Don't know why.
But what we saw on those
little 17-inch displays,
we saw on the iMac screens.
We're looking at a 17-inch display,
and they're looking at
a 70-foot tall screen,
and they matched.
You know, we obviously,
we did a lookup table,
hardware lookup table for the monitors
so that they all stayed consistent,
and also kudos to CFI for making
things look like they're supposed to,
and our film outputs were pretty good.
Firewire drives, absolutely a necessity.
We were rendering to the firewire
drives and checking them,
and then boom, they go out the door,
go to the lab, they get recorded,
they get filmed out.
So these large firewire
drives were just a godsend,
because this show was about throughput.
Dual-proc machines.
Software, After Effects,
believe it or not.
Combustion.
There were two other
companies that worked on this,
Imagica and Sassoon Film Design.
Imagica used some shake.
And procedural methods.
And I can't stress enough how
important procedural methods are.
Because procedural methods make
you use the tools that you need.
And I can't stress enough how
important procedural methods are.
Because procedural methods make
you use the tools that you need.
And I can't stress enough how
important procedural methods are.
Because procedural methods make
you use the tools that you need.
that you have and come
up with a new solution.
Procedural methods are what we use to
define what is grain versus texture.
What is an edge?
What is an antler?
Stuff like that.
And we have to work outside the tools.
You're not just using one tool.
You're not just using one layer.
You're not just using one composition.
You're using several that are analyzing,
doing different things to create a whole.
Now,
can software be written that does this?
Absolutely.
I'd love to see it.
I'd rather, you know,
I'd love to see a plug-in
that would do all these steps.
Define the grain.
Define the edge detail.
That's, that kind of thing.
But there's always going to be a place
where you get to a shot and you see,
you know, like I said before,
the emulsion starting to separate.
You know, those are pretty esoteric and
bizarre things and you have to use
a procedural method to correct them.
Okay, the expense.
Obviously, we're on the desktop.
The expense wasn't so horrendous,
and that makes it pretty
attractive to producers.
If
client wanted us to do real-time 4K
color grading digital intermediate work.
You're talking about,
with the Cineon files,
you're talking about
terabytes of throughput.
Is it possible?
Yeah, actually,
a couple systems have actually been
made that have been able to do that.
The cost for the hardware is
around $300,000 or $400,000.
Software's on top of that.
You start getting a very
big bill very quickly.
Input/output is critical,
so I have to figure out how
to move stuff around and work
with different file formats.
And then, as I mentioned before,
understanding the medium.
If you work smart, you can work faster.
You're not just dealing with a problem.
And part of the digital intermediate
issue is who is owning it.
Because before, it was different steps.
It's like labs doing this part,
color timers doing this part,
DP's doing this part,
DP's used to using traditional
chemical methodology.
And who's really owning it?
And that's the big question right now,
because right now,
DI's just a big shotgun.
We've got colorists who do
nothing but color the film,
create a color look that
don't stabilize the shot,
that don't dustbust, that could.
But they're real-time.
Two-camera.
They're in the UK, usually.
Playback and color correction
while the client's there.
The client's not going to sit
there and watch you dustbust.
It's just not going to happen.
But that's part of it.
So, the current technology that's out
there in million-dollar suites is
only doing a half of what we had to
do to create a digital intermediate.
Okay, so future, what we need,
obviously large files
require a large pipeline.
You know, 4K is becoming a new standard
in digital effects work.
Spider-Man was, all the effects shots
were done with 4K plates,
not 2Ks.
Right now,
the architecture of file throughput
is a threaded architecture.
That means if you're using Cineon scans,
if you want to stay with the full range,
dynamic range of that film,
you're working with Cineon scans.
They are a sequence of frames.
They are not digital video format.
They are not QuickTime.
I would like to see
QuickTime become threaded,
which is basically why a
sequence of frames is necessary.
Because a sequence of frames can be
addressed over the network in parallel.
The more power you throw at it,
the more real-time effects,
the more throughput that you're getting.
Possibly the new hardware.
The new high-def standard that
is merging with QuickTime.
Seems like it can skip
around quite a bit.
I would love to see it used in
production in a parallel pipeline.
So you really are getting low data
rates consumption with high throughput.
You can get multiple effects,
color gradings applied to those things.
That would be fantastic.
Standards 3D Color Lookup Tables.
What's a 3D Color Lookup Table?
A Color Lookup Table basically says,
"Alright,
this is the amount of colors you can use
to display an image." There's software,
there's hardware lookup tables.
A 3D Color Lookup Table
is saying that all the
values are interrelated,
and that's how film works.
I mean, getting it to a high-depth
finishing station is great,
but if you really want to work with
the data the way that film works,
you have to work with a 3D lookup table.
And it just means the red, green,
blue affect each other.
If you affect the brightness of red,
you're
In a film 3D lookup table,
something's happening to
green and blue because that's
how the film emulsion works.
Kodak has created a 3D
lookup table fairly recently,
but it's only available for Kodak stocks.
So there's no 3D lookup table that
I know of for Fuji or other film stocks.
Also, because it's new,
it's not a standard.
It's being adopted for a lot
of color grading systems yet.
And then you're faced with the
arcane chemical technology,
which is how I started.
I started off in an optical lab.
I know about optical printers and
keeping the right temperature of
film suits and all that stuff.
And there are no direct correlations
between traditional color correcting
methods and film to digital.
Now, some software will say
we have printer lights,
we can match what's going on in the lab.
That's not necessarily true because
traditional color correction,
if you say you're adding 10 points
of red or adding some red to it,
you're not cranking the red.
That's not how film works.
But in most,
the software that's available now,
you say, well,
the DP wants you to add red.
Well, you add red to it.
That's not correct.
That's not how film works.
You're overdriving the image.
You know, traditionally in a DP,
you'll say, I want more red,
I want you to add some neutral density,
I want you to do this or that,
and you can add a list of
criteria for his recipe,
and still the film will hold up,
it'll still look good.
But digitally,
you can seriously overdrive the image.
If the look that's being
required is pretty severe,
you can overdrive the image.
There's a lot of things
that need to be correlated.
Film bias, you know, how do we do that?
There's many issues.
So there are a few new technologies as
I wrap up here that are desktop systems.
They're not black boxes
that just do colorist work.
Lustre by Discrete,
it's kind of a black box.
It's proprietary.
It's a licensed technology.
They don't, you know,
do they really own it?
Only runs on Windows XP.
Luster is sort of an all-in-one
color grading system.
You do your color grading
and you get the results.
So you twist the dials,
you can get a result.
You can't get in backwards and
see what the dials were set to.
Final Touch is a new program,
it's a couple years old, runs on Mac G5s,
incredible throughput.
They're adding more and more tools to it.
It renders in floating.
The Big Key of QuickTime is the
ability to create a script for
what its color correction just did.
Instanciably,
that's being used to send out to other
speed-grade systems so they can go,
well, I can help you render,
I can help you make
the color corrections.
But I see as a real advantage
once color standards are set,
if scripts are written from these
color grading applications that
can be sent to other applications
that do more effects kind of work,
such as Shake,
then that would be fantastic.
So if you can,
that way the effects people or the
DP can decide where does this happen.
Do we do effects first and
then color grade or vice versa?
Which is really important.
Because if you're doing an effect
shot on something that color graded
and made it really spooky and dark,
well, you know, you got what you got.
You don't necessarily have
tracking points anymore
because the image is too dark.
And I think that's it for me.